---
layout: post
title: my north star
date: 2023-10-21 15:09:00
description: trial and error
tags: practice
categories: kausar-blog
featured: true
---

Aside from the goal of passing, I think the Solutions Architect exam is quite interesting. It passes down some practical knowledge about how AWS operates, and how one can go about designing effective workloads in the cloud. It will reflect well on my knowledge and abilities when I pass the exam. It will help me differentiate myself in the workplace. I see this exam as a starting point.

The machine learning specialization at Georgia Tech will help even further. I’m currently reading this book called ‘Life 3.0’ that talks about AI and the role it will play in shaping human civilization in the following decades. To have a meaningful role to play in this saga, I believe it’s exceedingly important to begin investing in my knowledge and learning new skills. This process will be challenging (as it is now), but every piece of effort I make daily will inch me towards this vision I’ve created for myself.

I would like to preface all of this by saying I will only seek to do what I believe is in humanity’s best interest. There’s a lot of ongoing debate around AI safety, and I wish to be on the right side of this historical tipping point. I will work hard, gain rare and valuable skills, and make a positive impact on the world.

I don’t want to go down the rabbit hole of analyzing what positive/negative means in this context. However, superintelligent systems could pave the path towards humans leading more meaningful lives. How that happens is still up for debate. As I progress through my career, I wish to keep this north star in mind.

I would not want to be an individual who’s chasing after the next promotion, or a larger paycheck. We’re all here for a reason, and I wish to utilize the limited time I have in a meaningful way.

Besides the learnings and readings I engage in, my life will turn out to be unique due to my other hobbies -- like fitness and music. These are activities that will differentiate me as a human being, allowing me to have novel experiences and seeing the world in a unique way. This distinct worldview will enable me to provide my own special contribution to the world. I will be able to go through my life knowing that every day adds up to a full expression of my being. More than any worldly rewards like money/adulation, this internal barometer is what will ultimately define my satisfaction with life.

“Most men lead lives of quiet desperation, and go to the grave with that song still in their hearts” - Henry David Thoreau. This is a quote that bubbled up in my head yesterday. The words I’d like to harp on are “quiet desperation”. There’s a disturbance in the psyche that needs addressing. This ties in well with the north star document I created for myself as a compass to follow. “To be in harmony with myself and others”. It’s an antidote to the sense of ‘desperation’ one experiences in their life. It’s possible to overcome this nagging feeling. As long as we work towards actualizing our mental and physical potential, to realize our own greatness. To truly achieve a level of personal sovereignty, an inner peace that’s independent of what’s happening around me, to be in constant pursuit of the joy one can experience being fully human. These are weighty words, but I do think there’s some truth to this. There’s a degree of autonomy that’s born out of showing up everyday and doing one’s best within the constraints an individual finds themself in. Mind, body, and interpersonal relationships -- these are the 3 pillars that support personal wellbeing. In my life, I try to stay intellectually stimulated with the work I do, books I read, certifications I study for, and degree I progress in. From the body perspective, I train hard - making sure the body is never disobedient to the mind, as Seneca points out. Taking care of my body and pushing my limits is the primary source of my day-to-day fulfillment. The relationship part is a work in progress. I have family and friends that are an integral part of my life. I value their presence in my life. At times, I falter with maintaining contact. It gets hard to do since we’re not physically proximate. On the other hand, to achieve a state of harmony in my interpersonal relationships, I’m being more intentional around the kinds of people I wish to surround myself with. Setting the right boundaries, defining the rules of engagement, forgiving quickly, choosing to not feel harmed and complicit in taking offense -- this is how I plan on building my own inner citadel and remaining tranquil.

I’m beginning to realize the importance of setting a clear vision in one’s life and how to get there. Initially, my objective was to get to America, so I pushed myself to score well on the ACT, applied to a bunch of schools, and eventually landed a spot in the industrial and systems engineering department at UIUC. My next objective was to get a job, a prestigious one, and consulting seemed like a good pick. I networked, filled my resume with experiences, practiced for interviews, and eventually landed a position as a technology consultant at Ernst & Young (EY). What I’m realizing now is it might be time for a change. This time, I want to dream big. Be audacious. Be hungry. Be foolish. At this point, I’ve realized one thing. I have an intense hunger within me to prove myself. I work hard once the goal has been set. This time, I want to push the limits of what I think is possible. Something I could not have conceived of a few years back.

I’m having visions that one day I’ll be leading my own company, a top-tier AI startup that delivers value to people around the world. The idea, product, and team will perfectly coalesce. To get closer to my goal, it will be best that I become a full-time student at Georgia Tech, immersing myself within the Atlanta community, pursuing cutting-edge research opportunities. I’d like to push the limits of my own intellectual capabilities, taking challenging classes like machine learning, deep learning, reinforcement learning, etc. Most importantly, this graduate degree will open doors for me, giving me the opportunity to get involved with a high-growth start-up and be part of building a great product. This experience will be worth its weight in gold. The objective this time isn’t to settle for a high-paying job. It may seem tempting, considering this is what most of your peers will do. But remember, there is a bigger game to play. We are on the precipice of an AI revolution and there’s a great deal of value that can be extracted. It’s in moments of disruption that incumbents fall and new companies take their place. This is your moment. Everything that has happened in your life thus far has been a training ground for this very moment. Do not let it pass you by. I’m glad I got the opportunity to work at EY this early in my career because it gave me direction, making me realize my own likes and dislikes. More than anything, I love having absolute ownership over the product I deliver. I take pride in the quality of my work.

As Arnold says, developing a clear vision is such a crucial part of the journey. Within technology, I will play the role of an AI leader, bringing to fruition a type of AI technology that is novel and valuable. I will be the one responsible for defining this new future. I will be the one creating this new world, a new culture, a new society. It will be my contributions that enable this. All the steps I take from now till this point will only serve to bring me closer to my goal. Within the field of fitness, I will be a top-rated Ironman athlete and an inspiration for all Indian and Asian men on what is truly possible. I will bring a unique voice to the world of fitness as I will be one of the only individuals who also has strong ties with the AI world. I will be able to use my cross-domain expertise to draw unique connections, taking the world of fitness to the next level, aided by AI. I will also be a great pianist/musician. The art I create, especially with the assistance of RNNs and other AI technology, will enable me to generate a prolific outpouring of content, differentiating me as a prodigious artist.