---
layout: post
title: practitioner's mindset
date: 2023-10-10 15:09:00
description: trial and error
tags: practice
categories: kausar-blog
featured: true
---

Trial and error - the value of tinkering to get one’s desired results. I came across this idea from reading Taleb’s “Antifragile”. The book talks about the value of being a practitioner, an individual who has a net positive impact on the world. He contrasts this ideal with a theoretician, someone who is keen on giving advice without any skin in the game. I found this idea quite compelling. It’s the direction I’d like to take my life in. Instead of getting stuck giving empty advice or turning into a boring academic, I would find much more meaning building tools that are of value to the people around me. Programming is a skill I love improving upon. I enjoy the process of iterating on my work until I get it to a desired place.

I would like to be an individual who is antifragile. That’s a person who grows regardless of the stressors they are exposed to. It’s linked to the idea of Amor Fati, a love of one’s fate. No matter what situation I find myself in, I will always use my circumstances as fuel -- pushing me to further grow, and becoming the person I was always meant to be. Becoming who I am. Like Hydra, if life tried to cut one of my heads, two more would grow in its place. There’s wisdom in the saying that “the more you do, the more you can do”. It’s like building muscle. You can keep getting stronger as you begin breaking your own limits.

I read a piece on nutrition by Peter Attia some time back. He spoke about nutrition’s black-box nature. We keep going around professing one diet after another, not knowing what works and what doesn’t. The topic’s complicated because one food can affect two people in entirely different ways. There’s so much we don’t understand about the interaction between food molecules and our own biochemistry. He points out that only one fundamental truth about nutrition is known -- that energy input must match energy output as closely as possible to maintain equilibrium. The obesity issue in the world is linked to individuals ignoring this fact. We eat mindlessly without any care in the world regarding how much we’re expending. We live in a society filled with plentitude, and that has brought with it its own share of problems.
I want to harp on the importance of sticking to the fundamentals of any particular field, like nutrition above. This must be done before venturing into overly complex terrain. The latter looks sophisticated, gives off an aura of intellectual superiority, but is most often than not a more illusion. By sticking to first principles, and building from there, one can never go wrong. This is related to a conversation I recently had with an entrepreneur in Silicon Valley. He spoke about the many talented engineers he’s interacted with over his three-decade long career. All of them had one thing in common -- an appreciation for the fundamentals. The reason they stuck around in their jobs for so long was because everyday turned out to be an adventure for them.

Everyday was an opportunity for them to refine their own knowledge structures and continue building their skillset. This is how a practitioner’s mind works. An individual who is a perpetual wanderer - a flâneur - is always tinkering around with what they know, exploring new territory, and ultimately driving innovation and growth in the world. That’s the kind of person I’d like to be. I fear becoming a mere academic, who makes his money giving advice to people without any real ownership in the overall outcome. That’s cowardice. We are better at doing than understanding. The world is too complex and a lot of it beyond our rational comprehension. The best way we can move forward is to learn by doing. That’s why I find the field of computer science so exciting. I have an opportunity to write my own programs and build my own systems, directly serving society. Instead of theorizing endlessly, I get the chance to be a do-er, someone who creates instead of aimlessly talking.
